# A Personal Story

I'd like to write about a particularly dark time in my spiritual journey and how I was finally able to come out of it—all related to assurance of salvation.

Soon after I became a Christian at the end of high school, I attended 7:22, a ministry of Passion Conferences. I immediately connected with Louie Giglio's teaching. Over the next few years,Giglio's emphasis on worship of God became foundational for me. At college, someone gave me a copy of the messages from one of Passion's conferences. I especially enjoyed the sermons on it from John Piper.

In the meantime, some friends and I started a small group ministry at our college. We got help from a couple who had been involved in Campus Outreach, a smaller campus ministry. Through their invitation, I attended a "summer beach project" for ministry training. But while I was there, I was surprised.  Campus Outreach talked about the idea that all true Christians' lives bear "fruit," which is to say good works. If you aren't bearing fruit, that begins to be evidence that you may not have been truly saved in the first place. This was so new and surprising to me—as well as my friends from college who attended with me—that at first we thought Campus Outreach might be a cult. We actually managed to find Louie Giglio at a summer camp he was speaking at and asked him if this view of fruit as evidence of salvation was legitimate. Without giving his exact view on it, Louie affirmed that this view was within the bounds of historical Christianity, so we were somewhat comforted, but still not convinced of the view. For myself, my Christian background had been at North Point Community Church, a nondenominational church with a Baptist background. Their view, the one I had always heard, was that once you trust in Christ, you can know for sure that you're saved, no matter what sins you struggle with. So I continued to hold that view.

A few years later, I was out of college and began listening to the podcast from Piper's church. When he preached on Romans 8:29-32, all of a sudden the idea of predestination became compelling to me. On his recommendation, I also read Jonathan Edwards' *Religious Affections*. Over time, as I learned from those two, their repeated themes of fruit as evidence of salvation began to sink in with me. I heard teaching on verse after verse that suggested that believers' lives must show external evidence of their salvation. They also painted a picture of what it looks like to embrace this view of the Christian life. The picture I saw of deep dependence on God, seeking him for the strength to stand against sin, was very appealing. As a result, I became convinced that fruit really was necessary evidence of salvation.

Eventually I changed churches to a small Reformed Baptist church that had more of a focus on teaching doctrine, and that shared my viewpoint on predestination and holiness. However, getting deeply involved in this church was challenging. There were only a few dozen people who attended, and there were no ministries other than the Sunday service.

I also gradually started drifting away from my friends from previous churches. I still hung out with them socially at first, but as my view on the Christian life got stricter, I started judging their own walks with God. Seeing some of my theological beliefs as foundational, I decided that if God is working in someone's life, he is certainly leading them to that same foundation—so if someone claimed to be learning from God but disagreed with these beliefs of mine, I couldn't believe God was really at work. So in addition to lacking fellowship at my small church, I lacked it in friendships too.

At this point I made what turned out to be a disastrous decision—but it was no accident, but rather a culmination of my thought processes up until that time. I decided that instead of finding a ministry or community to join, I would start my own. I figured I had a combination of theological and ministry views that was a better combination than other ministries'. Yet my efforts yielded almost no results: no deeper relationships, no one attending. Then I left the Reformed Baptist church I had been attending due to doctrinal differences and began searching again, but without another good church option.

In the meantime, my personal moral struggles increased, exacerbated no doubt by a lack of fellowship support and frustration with my circumstances. One major example is anger: the anger struggles I'd always had increased, and I frequently found myself swearing and holding grudges. These moral struggles made me grapple with implications of my "fruit as evidence of salvation" theology. As long as I had felt like I was doing pretty well seeking God and following him, that theology was an encouragement to me to keep seeking. But once I started struggling morally, all of a sudden that theology made things difficult. From Jonathan Edwards I got the idea that just because you felt like you wanted to obey God, that didn't mean that was what you *really* wanted; you might be deceiving yourself. Your actions showed whether you really wanted to obey God or not. I'm not sure I ever questioned my salvation, but I questioned at what point I *should* question my salvation. And whereas previously the main approach to combating sin I had been taught was to renew your mind to what God said was true of you in Christ, now I concluded that the more I struggled with sin, the less confidence I could have that any of those promises were really true of me. This feeling of helplessness led to even less resistance to sin and became a downward spiral.

Due to anxiety thinking about all of this, I started experiencing some sleep and  health problems as well. So, in total, in this period God took away many things from me:

* Church connection
* Ministry
* Fellowship
* My walk with God
* Sleep and health

It seems clear to me that the reason God did this was as a warning to me. I was heading down a path of theological pride and judgment of others, and one where reliance on my own moral abilities would take over my reliance on grace. If he had allowed me to have any success in this approach it's unlikely I would have changed course. So God took away most of my support so that I would have to question what to do.

To try to get out of this state, I started taking time to relax before bed and not let myself worry about theology at that time. Then I decided to attend Perimeter Church and join their singles ministry to get some fellowship. Even though I disagreed with more things in their theology than in the Reformed Baptist church's, I knew I needed some way to connect with more believers.

Soon after that, I decided to go to a Christian counselor to work on my anger issues. He helped me narrow down my long list of "essential" theological beliefs. I had also heard a prominent Calvinist say that the best Calvinists and Arminians have always respected each other as brothers in Christ. If they could accept that God was working in each other's lives despite their foundational disagreements, I needed to do the same for others who differed from me theologically.

These changes freed me up to get sleep, to be plugged in to a church, and to have the support of friendships.

I don't remember exactly when I first started letting go of the belief that fruit is a necessary evidence of salvation, but I do remember exactly *why*. I continued to pray about what to do with all my uncertainty about my sin struggles and if I should question my salvation. I ran across Romans 5:1—"Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." I realized that this was what had changed in my life since I had started believing in fruit-as-evidence: with this belief, it was impossible for me to have peace. I knew I would always have some degree of sin in my life, and—because there was no clear Biblical direction about which kind or severity or frequency or attitude of sin is okay and which is too much—I would always have reason to worry about whether I should be questioning my salvation. That meant that experiencing peace with God was impossible. I realized that reasoning about Biblical doctrines should involve not only the passages that directly address doctrine but also the passages that describe the *outcome* of the doctrine. If one's doctrine makes it impossible to live the kind of life the Bible describes, that's a reason to question one's interpretation of doctrinal passages.

That was the point when I first wanted to let go of the belief in fruit as evidence of salvation, and to return to my original belief of absolute assurance: that if you know there was a moment in time when you entrusted your salvation to Jesus, that you can know for sure that you are saved. However, my mental and emotional transition to that belief was a very gradual process. I can remember at least three major time periods when I was reading and thinking through it in depth, and each time I thought I was convinced to stop believing in fruit-as-evidence, but each time eventually I realized I was still conflicted.

In 2017 I started attending Bible Study Fellowship. Regularly throughout their notes they teach fruit as evidence of salvation. Eventually in 2019 my discomfort with this teaching prompted me to read Martin Luther's *Commentary on Galatians*. This at last was a clear picture of the Biblical Gospel and how introducing works in any way into justification or assurance is a rejection of the Gospel in favor of Law. Luther described our helplessness as sinners, the great value of Christ's blood shed for us, and the utter folly of trying to please God with our works that are marked by sin.

Between Luther's theology and the detailed argumentation of other books for assurance based on faith and against assurance based on works, I've finally become convinced that I can embrace complete assurance based on faith. It also helps that I have three children now, and when I consider the difference between the despair that fruit-as-evidence leads to and the peace that assurance-from-faith leads to, I would do anything to guide my children away from the former to the latter.

I've created this web site as a way to record my understanding of assurance and to share it with others, so they can avoid or escape the teaching of fruit as evidence of salvation. That teaching is unbiblical, illogical, and disastrous for faith and holiness. I would encourage you to read this web site and the books it links to, and think carefully and prayerfully about the Scripture they point to.
